docs: document PR review states (#1306)
generative-computing/mellea: CONTRIBUTING.md

Reviewer: I don't want this to get too big because people don't read anymore, but contrary to that, it's nice to have stuff written down when it helps.

A few things come time mind that I didn't see addressed (maybe off topic):

* we don't have an official stance on auto-merge -- ok... that means it is allowed
* we don't have a stance on "dismiss review".  Common sense?
* I'm really curious about use of the resolve button.  Sometimes I really like to use that as a contributor to clean up conversation, but the better practice is probably for the reviewer to do that.  So stuff stays unresolved.

I don't think any of those ^^^ need to be part of this unless some interesting team decision follows.

8. **Push to your fork** and create a pull request to the main repository
9. **Follow the automated PR workflow** instructions

### Review States

> When submitting a PR review, pick one of GitHub's three states. Using them consistently keeps the merge signal meaningful: an `APPROVE` should mean the reviewer is willing to support the change, and a `REQUEST CHANGES` should mean something is actually blocking.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I agree request changes == blocking. I think it just means I'm requesting changes before I approve.

Reviewer 2: Another thing to note: if a PR is set to auto-merge, an approve does not allow others a chance to weigh in (though it also means the original reviewer check back later if they don't approve and no one else does).

We also have a `do-not-merge/hold` label that in theory can be used with an approve to work around that... not elegant but I think this is a scenario we may need to account for.

Author: > I'm not sure I agree request changes == blocking. I think it just means I'm requesting changes before I approve.

I agree that the wording could be better, but from a technical perspective it is true, our CI does block merging when requests changes is true.

>  if a PR is set to auto-merge, an approve does not allow others a chance to weigh in

This only happens if a requests change review doesn't also exist, which lines up with the `I want to be able to re-review before this merges` idea above, but a reviewer could still miss if they haven't submitted a review yet (like if they're mid review locally)

> We also have a do-not-merge/hold label

I could see including that as part of this doc, but I'm not sure in what way would be best

Reviewer 2: >> if a PR is set to auto-merge, an approve does not allow others a chance to weigh in

> This only happens if a requests change review doesn't also exist, which lines up with the I want to be able to re-review before this merges idea above, but a reviewer could still miss if they haven't submitted a review yet (like if they're mid review locally)

One of the the scenarios I'm thinking of is something like this:
- You and I are tagged as reviewers on a PR
- You review, and the author makes changes to address your review
- I review, and the author makes changes to address my review

Who approves in that scenario? In theory we _both_ should, but if auto-merge is on only one of us can. Which is mildly annoying. Not majorly, because there's numerous ways to work around this (requesting changes, 1st reviewer just comments, approve+hold, get rid of auto merge, only have one person review a PR, etc.). Just nothing that feels exactly right (though in the real world, sometimes good enough is good enough 😄 )

Reviewer 2: > I agree that the wording could be better, but from a technical perspective it is true, our CI does block merging when requests changes is true.

Fair enough. The bullets below are more nuanced as well, so all good.

Reviewer: it almost sounds like @psschwei  wants to disable auto-merge, but I know it ain't so

Reviewer 3: I can see the issue here with multiple requested changes from multiple people - at the end of the day I think the LGTM/approve bestows with the co-responsibility of understanding/maintaining that area in the future.

We could have a community guideline that if there are multiple changes requested reviews, all but the last would simply "dismiss" their review - which becomes unblocking. This guideline would mean the last person with changes requested not yet re-reviewed would be the only approval.

Reviewer 2: > it almost sounds like @psschwei wants to disable auto-merge, but I know it ain't so

I go back and forth... I _think_, this morning, I leans towards reviewer merges (which makes the auto-merge question moo), but I reserve the right to wake up smarter tomorrow...

Reviewer 4: I personally like the PR creator to merge; if they want the reviewer to merge, they can just set auto-merge.

I also think request changes should be soft blocking; ie the pr opener can dismiss a review and move on without it but that should be an operation imbued with seriousness and responsibility.

| State | Use when |
|-------|----------|
| `APPROVE` | You'd be fine if this merged as-is. |
| `REQUEST CHANGES` | This PR shouldn't merge in its current form. |
| `COMMENT` | Anything else, or a follow-up that doesn't change the prior status. |

**`APPROVE`** — the reviewer is willing to support the change.

> - The PR is ready to merge as-is, with or without non-blocking nits or follow-up suggestions that the author may address or skip with no harm.

Reviewer 5: and specifically that don't require any followup

- The standard open-source "LGTM" signal: the reviewer stands behind the change.

**`REQUEST CHANGES`** — the PR should not merge in its current form. Use when:
- There is an actual blocking or breaking issue (correctness, regression, missing tests, etc.).

> - The reviewer wants to personally validate something before the PR merges, and is withholding their approval until the next round.

Reviewer 5: I would say that they have a significant concern they need to validate.

> - Important follow-up issues have not yet been opened, and the reviewer doesn't want them forgotten. The expectation here is that the issues get filed, not that the PR itself changes.

Reviewer 2: I could see another scenario here: `I want to be able to re-review before this merges`. That is similar to your second bullet, but the intent is slightly different.

Author: I wonder if we should just soften bullet two to that. I could see it as a subset of that scenario

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure 'I want' is enough in it's own right. it should be supported by the other criteria - ie believing there'd be a regression, or that the code is incomplete/slightly regressive without followups.

Reviewer 2: It's not always quite so cut and dry. Sometimes reviews are a conversation (why did you do this approach? Have you thought about that other approach? etc.), and in those cases the original reviewer might want to be able to re-review. This also ties in with the auto-merge discussion below. I guess the larger question (which we're sort of hinting around without explicitly addressing) is, when is it ok to merge a PR?

Reviewer: if you don't "request changes"/block then you have to realize that a merge might happen and comments/threads may get lost (missed/forgotten).  But we also have a typically better behavior than that, and the norm is that nobody presses the merge button w/o proper follow-up.  It's not perfect.  When stuff gets missed this way the fix is to enter issues, have discussions...   If that isn't good enough for a concern then it should be a request changes.

Reviewer 3: Agreed with actual blocking portion or important followup not open yet.  I think the "I want to re-review" portion makes sense as well, though in this case I think having the blocking change request is a prerequisite.

As for Paul's comment about when it's OK to merge my 2C:
1. All of CI passes
2. Minimum approvals are already in, ie one could actually merge
3. Nobody has requested a major change that is not yet addressed - this is a small caveat as sometimes there is a discussion here without an explicit requests changes.

**`COMMENT`** — for everything else. Use when:
- Posting a follow-up review that shouldn't change the PR's status from a prior `APPROVE` or `REQUEST CHANGES` (e.g., re-reviewing after a push when nothing material changed).
- The review falls between `APPROVE` and `REQUEST CHANGES` and the reviewer doesn't want to block.

> - The reviewer wants to defer the final call to other reviewers.

Reviewer: Maybe somewhere we should mention something about deferring to other reviewers.  Is there a concise rule that says you should comment about your intentions or just leave that to implied/common sense?  Curious but wouldn't want to get to wordy about that here.

Reviewer 4: I do think we should at least make it socially acceptable to say that you would prefer someone else to review this area of the code. For instance, if I was requested on a PR about telemetry not opened by Alex, I would ask that he be requested as well (or even review instead of me).

| State | Use when |
|-------|----------|
| `APPROVE` | You'd be fine if this merged as-is. |
| `REQUEST CHANGES` | This PR shouldn't merge in its current form. |
| `COMMENT` | Anything else, or a follow-up that doesn't change the prior status. |

**`APPROVE`** — the reviewer is willing to support the change.
- The PR is ready to merge as-is. Any nits or suggestions are non-blocking; the author may address or skip them with no harm. If something needs a follow-up so it isn't forgotten, that belongs under `REQUEST CHANGES` instead.
- The standard open-source "LGTM" signal: the reviewer stands behind the change and shares responsibility for maintaining that area going forward.

**`REQUEST CHANGES`** — the PR should not merge in its current form. Use when:
- There is an actual blocking or breaking issue (correctness, regression, missing tests, etc.).
- The reviewer needs to validate a concrete concern (a suspected regression, an incomplete change) before the PR merges, and is withholding approval until the next round. Wanting another pass without a specific concern isn't on its own a reason to block; coordinate with the author by comment instead.

> - Important follow-up issues have not yet been opened, and the reviewer doesn't want them forgotten. The expectation here is that the issues get filed, not that the PR itself changes.

Reviewer 5: The intent here is clear, but a reader encountering this cold might wonder: once the issues are filed, who re-approves and when does the block clear? Suggesting an exit condition to close the loop:

```suggestion
- Important follow-up issues have not yet been opened, and the reviewer doesn't want them forgotten. The expectation is that the issues get filed — not that the PR itself changes — at which point the reviewer re-approves.
```

Author: updated

**`COMMENT`** — for everything else. Use when:
- Posting a follow-up review that shouldn't change the PR's status from a prior `APPROVE` or `REQUEST CHANGES` (e.g., re-reviewing after a push when nothing material changed).
- The review falls between `APPROVE` and `REQUEST CHANGES` and the reviewer doesn't want to block.
- The reviewer wants to defer the final call to other reviewers.
- The review is purely informational and the reviewer isn't gating on the PR at all.

### Merging

> Merging is a maintainer action, performed by either the author or a reviewer; "merge when ready" only schedules it once requirements pass. Whoever merges confirms the PR is actually ready, not just that the queue requirements are green. CI passing and the minimum approval make a PR *mergeable*, but a concern raised in discussion that never became an explicit `REQUEST CHANGES` should still be resolved first.

Reviewer 5: "Whoever merges confirms the PR is actually ready" is sound guidance, but there's no stated mechanism for the merger to discover unresolved concerns. One option is to make this self-enforcing: GitHub's branch-protection setting **"Require conversation resolution before merging"** would enforce it at the repo level and remove the need for the prose instruction entirely. Worth considering alongside this doc update.

cc @psschwei — you were discussing the auto-merge / merge-gate setup earlier in this thread, so this seems relevant.

Reviewer 2: I like that
edit: and by that, I mean requiring conversation resolution

> The `do-not-merge/hold` label blocks merging while it is applied, enforced by CI independent of review state. It is a separate mechanism from a `REQUEST CHANGES` review and is removed once the blocking condition clears.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `do-not-merge/hold` label blocks merging while it is applied, enforced by CI independent of review state. It is a separate mechanism from a `REQUEST CHANGES` review and is removed by a maintainer once the blocking condition clears.
```

Author: I'd rather not specific this here as anyone with triage access could edit labels, not just maintainers.
